The demos are in the process of being integrated into the MOOSE GUI. This
README is for users who still want to do command-line testing of MOOSE.


This directory has demo simulations for MOOSE. To run them you should
cd into the appropriate subdirectory and type moose <scriptfile>
as given below. Please note that you need write permissions to the
demo directories, since all the demos generate file output. You may
have to copy the entire DEMOS directory to your home folder for this.

Directory	Command		Output file(s)		NOTES
axon		moose Axon.g	axon*.moose.plot	Another axon model.
channels	moose Channels.g  *.moose.plot		Tests channel properties
kholodenko	moose Kholodenko.g test.plot		Kinetic simuation test
							Output not compatible
							with gnuplot.
							Ignore warnings about 
							simundumpfunc and setfield
mitral-ee	moose Mitral.g	mitral.moose.plot	Large mitral cell model
myelin		moose Myelin.g	*.moose.plot		Myelinated axon
network-ee	moose Network.g				Models a small network
pymoose		python squid.py				Needs moose.py
rallpack1	moose Rallpack1.g cable-*.moose.plot	Passive cable test
rallpack2	moose Rallpack2.g branch*.moose.plot	Branched passive cable
rallpack3	moose Rallpack3.g axon_*.moose.plot	Hodkin-Huxley axon 
squid-ee	moose Squid.g	squid.moose.plot	Hodkin-Huxley Squid model
synapse		moose Synapse.g	*.moose.plot		Synaptic transmission
traub91		moose Traub91.g	*.moose.plot		Traub CA3 cell model

To run in Windows, you may have to first open a DOS shell and cd into the 
demo subdirectory you wish to try. Then type
..\..\..\moose <scriptfile>
to run the demo.

In most subdirectories you can then use gnuplot to look at the output using
the command:
gnuplot plot.gnuplot

PyMoose Demos: 

There are some demos written in Python in the pymoose directory. You
should cd into the directory and enter python <scriptfile> as listed
below. Some of them will pop-up a gui and some will just create data
files with the extension '.plot'.

Directory      Command			Output file(s)		NOTES
channels       python test_bulbchan.py	KMitralUSB_Vm.plot  	The bulbchan.py 
	       	      			NaMitralUSB_Vm.plot     implements K channel
                                                       		and Na channel of 
								mitral cells in the 
								olfactory bulb. The 
								two classes defined 
								here can be used in 
								other models.
izhikevich     python Izhikevich.py	<neuron-name>_vm.plot   This gives a gui with
	       	      			<neuron-name>_i.plot	buttons for different
                                                                types of neurons and	
								you can click any of 
								them to see the plot
								of membrane potential
								of the same. Two data
								files - one of the Vm
								and the other of the
								injection current 
								applied is created for
								each run.
squid		python qtSquid.py				This is the PyMoose
		       						avatar of the GENESIS
								squid demo. This pops
								up two windows - one 
								for the plots and one 
								for simulation control.
								To run the simulation
								first click the reset 
								button, then the run
								button.
-		python pulsegen.py	pulse*.plot		This shows various 
					gate.plot		modes of the pulse
					trig.plot		generator in MOOSE.				
